Talking to Dawn Dewey, who is the head of Special Collections and Archives at Wright State University.
And it's, what's the date today?
The 21st.
21st.
July.
2004.
So it's just far away.
Well, we're glad to have you here.
It's a delight.
This Wright Brothers collection that we have is so remarkable.
And the thing that I like about it is it tells us so much more than just airplane construction and the technical aspects.
It's social and cultural history as well.
The Wright Brothers' collection is a part of many, many aviation collections that we have here.
Just briefly to give you an overview of the whole place, not only do we collect and provide access to things on aviation history, but we do the local and regional history of this area.
We have a lot of collections on politics, labor, church history, family history, the arts, civic organizations, just about any topic you can think of, military history.
We have collections that relate to that, as well as some local authors.
We've got Suzanne Clauser's papers here, A Girl Named Sooner.
It's one of her most famous works.
And then there are some other local people who are, I guess we could classify them as local inventors who are self-made sorts of people with not that much education.
Of course, Wilbur and Orville being there.
Well, that's what's very attractive.
Right.
I can't get away from that word.
We're also the archives for the university, so we keep track of that.
The Wright Brothers collection, we have a public guide to that collection, and that's this particular volume here.
And this is also available online at our website.
So after you leave here today, if you want to look at the collection overall, if you missed something today or you want to see something, you can look at that.
What I printed out here for you was a list of what is in their technical library.
as well as what is in their personal library.
These are the books that came in to our collection about 30 or 40 years ago when the collection first came here in the late 70s.
The technical library includes a lot of books on aviation, a lot of aviation journals.
Some of the books are annotated by, we believe, Wilbur, and I'll show you those books today.
We've got them in an exhibit case over here, but things like Lilienthal's Bird Flight, Octave Chanute's Progress and Flying Machines,
some of Langley's works, books that were published at the time on aviation, which they were reading to find out what else had been done.
And some of these books were sent to them by other scholars, researchers, scientists, and others I'm sure they just went out and got for their own library.
The two cases that are here are full of books from their library, a lot of aviation journals, too, from the turn of the century.
How large was their library, do you think, approximately?
volumes, including their technical library that you'll see this afternoon that are still in Orville's library there.
And so I'm not sure how many are there.
So, you know, we're talking more than what we just have here.
And again, I missed it because I pushed a button there.
That's okay.
What was the number?
I'm thinking, I'm guesstimating.
What we have here is probably three to four hundred volumes.
Three to four hundred.
But I'm sure there are more in Orville's Library out at Hawthorne Hill.
So were these guys readers?
Oh, yes.
Gracious readers.
Really?
Yeah.
Eclectic, or were they focused?
Well, as far as aviation, they were very focused.
And then I think in later years, especially after Wilbur passed away in 1912, Orville's Library starts to include a lot of things that appealed to him with respect, not to aviation, but to
birds of trees and popular fiction at the time, books that Catherine, his sister, would have either received as gifts or amassed in her—she was a teacher.
She went to Oberlin College, so there are a few of her textbooks in the library.
She was very well-educated and intelligent, well-written.
Do you think she helped in an intellectual sort of way?
Do you think she contributed?
I know the perception of her as kind of the manager, the one who's taking care of them.
I think she was very capable of holding intelligent conversations with them and understanding maybe not all the specific technical aspects of the airplane, but I think she was probably a good person that they could bounce ideas off of.
just to get a reaction.
Maybe not technical things, but... It's funny.
I was at a second-hand bookstore in Cape Cod a couple of weeks ago, and they had this book, and I said about buying it, because they wanted $1,500.
There was a person, and I said, you do a printout for me, and apparently this is a book that... This is the one we have here that belonged to the rights, yes.
And I should just say it for the sake of my tape recorder what it is, and it was significant to them, right?
Very significant.
This is Octave Chanute's Progress in Flying Machines, and he was one of the...
probably the most knowledgeable individuals at the time on aviation and gliding.
And so they respected him and studied his work quite extensively and became friends with him.
And he encouraged them, wanted to hear what ideas they had, argued with them sometimes about whether they were right or he was right.
But this is one of the... So you think this was a case where they read his book and then they contacted him?
They established a relationship with him?
A communication with him?
Yeah.
They were aware of Chanute and knew that he had been doing some work in this field and they had studied his work.
And I'd have to go and check the records to see if he contacted them first or they him.
I think Wilbur wrote to him, in fact.
On the strength of having read his book.
So that's kind of something that...
I'd like to follow up on it, and if we can't get to it today, maybe if you don't mind, we could, you know... I'm sure we can verify that today.
This particular set here... And that's the Papers of Wilbur and Orville Life, published by McGraw-Hill.
Yes.
You familiar with that set already?
No, I'm just saying it.
Okay, I'm sorry.
This particular two-volume set, these are letters and diary entries that are contained in the collection, their personal collection,
that is housed at the Library of Congress.
The letter that Wilbur wrote to Chanute, I'm sure, is in that first volume, and so we'll pull that out today, and you can read that.
But that was the first published work that helped to disseminate their letters and diary entries.
So that's definitely something you'd probably want to take a look at because it's their words and writing.
When was that approximately published?
This is about the third edition.
Oh, they could have that at Clark University.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, this is 2001.
It was first published back in the 70s.
Well, no, probably the 50s because the collection went to the Library of Congress shortly after Orville died in 48.
Yeah, I'm sure the front will tell you.
Fifty-three.
Fifty-three, yeah.
Right.
So, yeah.
They pursued other people at the time who were studying aviation.
They also studied Lilienthal, the German glider pilot.
They were aware of what he was doing.
They followed his experiments in the newspapers, articles.
They were
Wilbur especially was upset when Lilienthal was killed in a gliding accident, and I think it made him want to study even more, to figure out what went wrong, because he didn't want to make the same mistake.
Now, were these people publishing books and journals, and you think that maybe there were the rights of reading them, and this is how they were getting... I'm sure they were.
...started to stay focused on this particular life.
That's okay.
That's all right.
I think they definitely were.
Wilbur, especially, was very interested.
I mean, he was a reader.
He was very smart, even though they didn't have much formal education.
And what was the extent of their formal education?
Wilbur completed high school, but for a long time, the stories were that neither of them had completed a high school education.
But Wilbur, in fact, completed high school in Richmond, Indiana, but moved before the commencement exercises and didn't collect his diploma.
So no diploma existed for him.
They gave him his diploma posthumously about ten years ago.
Richmond High School now has Wilbur Wright as a graduate.
Wilbur was, in fact, planning on going to college, to Harvard.
I think he'd even done the application, but he had a hockey accident.
He was playing a game of shinny or ice hockey.
at the local VA, our veterans home, soldiers and sailors home here in Dayton.
It was a place people went for recreational purposes.
And he got smashed in the mouth with a hockey stick, lost a lot of teeth, or damage to his teeth.
We're not sure how extensive it was, but we know he had to go to the dentist and get a lot of work done.
And it really shook him up.
And the family stories are that he just kind of withdrew into himself.
At the time, his mother was very sick with tuberculosis and dying.
And so he decided he wouldn't go to college.
He stayed home, took care of his mother.
She eventually died.
And he never did pursue.
Was he admitted to Harvard?
Do you know?
I don't know.
It'd be interesting to look at the school records to see if he actually sent in that application or whether this is all just hearsay.
But he did have plans to go on to college.
Harvard is the one that we've clearly had the...
the intellect commensurate with the Harvard education.
At what point do you think he becomes impassioned with flight?
I mean, is there something in particular that really gets him... That question's been asked so many times, and the general opinion is that after his mother died, he was searching.
He was a young man, you know, right around 20.
He was searching, what am I going to do with my life?
I'm not going to go to college.
He was a very quiet, reserved sort of person.
Some say he was just searching for something that would spark his interest, that would get him going, and he got interested in flight just through books he'd read or newspaper clippings he was hearing about Lilienthal.
So I don't think there's any one thing, although people like to say that the thing that sparked their interest initially was a little toy helicopter that their father gave them when they were little boys.
Every little boy likes spikes.
A dollar across the baton.
Yeah.
Like helicopters.
They keep books from their youth or mainly things that... We have school books.
You know, like the McGuffey Readers and some of the early things.
They kept them.
We have Orville's Botany Sketchbook in the collection.
I'll show you that today.
We don't have much...
in the way of Wilbur's, other than his report cards, we have their report cards from Wilbur and Orville and Catherine, so you can see what subjects they studied and what grades they got.
We have an essay that Catherine wrote for the school newspaper.
There's not much on Wilbur, a little bit more on Orville and more on Catherine as far as school things that are still in the collection.
And there are some writings by their father, Milton, who in his letters he will describe his kids.
what they look like, or what their personalities are like.
But as far as Wilbur, it's hard to pin down any one striking moment that suddenly he said, I'm going to build the first powered airplane.
There's no epiphanous moment that we can certainly have any document that's been recorded.
Wouldn't it be wonderful if he was reading some book, you know, and said, boy, this is it.
The light flashes.
But there's no really one great
Is there any great epiphanous moment where they say, aha, the eureka moment, I guess, when they've got it, when they've figured it out?
When they solve the problem of flight, they say that Wilbur was messing with a bicycle inner tube box in the bicycle shop one day.
And at the time, they had already been experimenting with gliders while they were running their bicycle shop, kites and gliders.
And the story is that Wilbur was twisting this box while he was talking to a customer.
and suddenly said, oh, this looks like a biplane, or this looks like a kite, and these look like wings, and why couldn't we make the wings of the glider do this?
And that's where this whole idea of wing warping supposedly came from.
So that's been, you know, passed down through over time, that that was kind of the moment where... But that was inspiration.
That was inspiration, yeah.
Picked up from... Right.
Somebody.
Yeah.
There was always that human intellect that... Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Orville, on the other hand, didn't like school very much.
The stories are that he got into trouble a lot, that he couldn't concentrate.
He was either too smart and they weren't giving him enough stimulation.
Stories are that he skipped school when his mother first sent him off to first grade or second grade.
He'd go out and meet his buddy and it looked like they'd gone to school, but they didn't.
They went back to the other buddy's house and played all day.
And I guess after a couple of weeks she found out about this and was, of course, quite upset with him.
And I think she got him a tutor or homeschooled him for a while, but she eventually packed him off back to school and he stayed.
But he did drop out in high school.
He did not finish.
He went to, I think, about sophomore, junior year of high school and then said, this is not for me, and left.
And he was more interested in pursuing starting his own business or
just pursuing other things like printing and then the bicycle shop and so forth.
So formal education, not much at all.
I think they had what it took upstairs to that inquisitiveness and just voracious readers.
They had parents who encouraged them to study and to pursue.
And this is documentable.
That's something I'd kind of like to get a little detail on.
Okay.
One thing I think that would help, there's a book that was published by their niece.
This one's called Wright Reminiscences, and it was published in 1978.
Ivanette Wright Miller is the compiler, and she was the Wright brothers' niece.
She was the daughter of one of their older brothers.
And for years, these stories about the Wright Brothers' childhood and what it was like to be around them as adults were passed around through the family and from friends.
And someone encouraged Ivanette to put those stories together before they were lost.
And so this particular volume is full of reminiscences by family members or by other people who knew them, pilots, businessmen, people they worked with.
So you can get a sense of their...
childhood, as well as, you know, what they were like as adults to be around from that particular book.
Is this actually published or is this for the typescript?
It's published by the Air Force Museum, the Friends group, and I think you can still purchase copies over there.
I'm not sure if I have any extras around here.
That tells me how I can get them.
Yeah, but the Air Force Museum bookstore, I'm sure you could get a copy.
I think they're still printing it.
Good.
But that would be a good one for, you know, just personality to learn a bit more about what they were like.
Excellent.
That's a good one.
I should be able to find that.
Yeah, I'll see if we have an extra.
We get a lot of book donations around here.
If you have one, that would save me time.
And this biography, I know, is supposed to be the Bishop's Boys.
I think it's supposed to be very, very good.
I think I have.
I'm pretty sure I have this one.
That one has been reprinted in the last year or so in softbound paperback as well.
Tom Crouch, the author of that one, senior curator at the Air and Space Museum, he's really the foremost expert on the Wright Brothers.
He would be a very good person to talk to.
He's in Washington?
He's in D.C.
He is a native of this area in Dayton.
He travels back here quite often, but he is at the National Air and Space Museum, and I can give you his contact information, his email and his phone number.
Terrific.
But he'd be a great one to talk to because he's researched them extensively.
I think he's really considered the expert.
Good.
In the last year or so, because of the centennial, there have been many biographies pop up, and the next one probably that I'd recommend is Ian Macersey's, the big thick one there on the bottom.
He did extensive research and I think filled in some holes perhaps that Tom had not, you know, the materials weren't available at the time, but Macrisy was able to track them down.
And I've not read all of that one yet.
I'm still working my way through it, but he, it's a good biography.
There's a couple of other things as far as published materials.
There's an early, this one,
This one was done in 1955 by an author named Lois Mills, and it's called Three Together, and it's a story about Wilbur Orville and Kaplan as children.
And I think it's based more on stories, family stories, and maybe rumors or legend that's been passed down.
And this is kind of hard to get a hold of.
We've got a Xerox copy of it that you can take with you if you'd like.
But that might be something to read about their early childhood.
Oh, yes.
Feel free.
Snape?
Yes.
Yeah, put them over on the fragile side.
All right.
Wonderful one.
Yeah.
It's a pictorial cloth.
Been well read, hasn't it?
Mm-hmm.
Three together.
See, it's a discard.
Mm-hmm.
Which I write about in my last book here.
I'm in a book here, an important book.
Mm-hmm.
This particular author interviewed people who knew the rights to try to write an accurate account of their childhood.
I think I'll get the answer with Crouch.
Yeah, he would be a very good one to talk, too.
This is another...
In 2000, this one was published.
These are the published writings of Wilbur and Orville.
Through this volume, you could read what they wrote, what they were thinking.
The book includes interviews that they did with newspaper reporters.
It includes articles that they wrote and have published in either aviation journals or newspapers or magazines.
It's divided into sections, depending on
on their life. Did they write a book documenting their? The only thing that was written would have been this and this is a reprint of something that Orville wrote that was entitled How We Invented the Airplane, so it's Orville's account of how they invented the airplane. Um yeah and I think this is pretty widely available.
Yeah.
In fact, you'd probably go to the Air Force Museum bookstore and buy all of these in one side.
Are they around?
Five minutes from here.
Very close.
Is there something I could do at some point?
Sneak out?
What you may want to do, depending on how much after this morning, depending on how much more you want to do here.
We could leave early on the way to lunch.
Or coming back in the afternoon.
Yeah, this afternoon.
Yeah, we'll stop in there.
That would really be good.
Yeah.
But I would recommend that one.
Now, Orville wrote that one, How We Invented the Airplane.
Of course, Wilbur died in 1912, so this was written a little bit later.
There is an article in Century Magazine that was published in 1906, I think, where Wilbur and Orville collaborated and put together an article that tells people the story of how they invented the airplane.
It's so interesting because are you familiar with the Printing and the Mind of Man exhibition in London, 1963?
No, I'm not.
And that's kind of framing this doesn't have to be.
They documented their achievements through diary entries, through journals, through correspondence with other individuals, and through photographs, thousands of photographs.
Well, there are thousands of photographs that document their entire career in aviation.
Very interesting.
But about—they took many, many photographs themselves at Kitty Hawk, and so they documented their gliders through those photographs.
And I'll show you those today.
I mean, this is a hundred years ago.
The camera is really, at that point, a very rudimentary instrument.
And yet they were doing visual documentation as opposed to— Exactly.
Visual and in their diaries.
The diaries weren't necessarily meant for dissemination, were they?
They probably weren't necessarily thinking that they were going to get published in a— The word in print in the mind of man is print.
It's where the Columbus letter announces the discovery of America.
This whole continent is bracketed in print, if you think about it.
The only great country anywhere where you can really say its beginnings are documented in print.
They did it, but they focused on photography, as you say.
Do you have the pictures here?
They have many of the original prints.
We've got some in the case right here.
And so what do they use of?
What kind of camera equipment do they use?
I suppose I'll get this out of here.
Yeah, there's a section right in the front of this particular book that tells you the type of camera they used and everything.
I'm not as versed at photography, so I can't tell you that off the top of my head.
But it's a box camera, like a 4x5 negative size glass plate.
Sure, yeah.
They took that to Kitty Hawk with them.
The camera is at Carillon Historical Park here in Dayton, the camera they used.
But can you imagine them hauling this camera on the train to Kitty Hawk, North Carolina in 1901, 2, and 3, and out there on the sand with a tripod?
Okay, you'd be very interested.
Very interesting.
But, you know, they took the photographs there on the beach.
They chose photography.
This is very interesting.
Well, it was a hobby of theirs before they went to Kitty Hawk.
But they chose, you know, they took the camera along and documented what they did.
And they chose photography as the medium of documentation.
Is that a fair statement?
Probably that was the primary method.
And then the diaries and the journals.
And the journals and the notes.
And did they fully annotate the pictures?
Did they have notes and captions?
Or are they just pictures?
Is it like a puzzle?
Do you have to figure out what place they are?
Some of them are a puzzle, even today.
Yeah.
We have found that they were labeled by people after the fact, and they're mislabeled.
But not by them?
But not by them.
Did they label any of them?
Yeah, they did, some, but not every single photograph.
The key ones, do you think?
The key ones, yes.
In fact, in the diaries,
There was a list of photographs that were taken where they do annotate some of those very earliest ones from Kitty Hawk.
The later ones are not quite as precisely listed.
But they were almost like an archivist.
They were keeping track.
They were making notes and keeping track and documenting through the photographs.
And because of that, we have these tremendous collections today that tell us the whole story.
Yeah, there are still questions that we don't know the answers to, but...
Oh, yeah.
I mean, if we knew all the answers, right?
We don't want to know all the answers.
So, but can somebody who's an inventor, who's smart, more or less replicate what they did by following their papers and their materials that they left?
Many groups have tried over the last couple of years.
One particular person, maybe you want to talk to him at some point.
His name is Ken Hyde, H-Y-D-E.
He lives in Virginia.
He heads up a company called Virginia Aviation, and they've spent the last, my goodness, five, ten years, I'm not sure how long, researching what the Wrights did.
They have been here to our archives and poured over pictures, zoomed in on, focused in on particular parts of the pictures.
Can you give me contact with me?
Yeah, yeah, sure, sure.
He would be able to tell you, you know, their journey of trying to discover how to replicate what the Wrights did.
He and his group are the ones that built the airplane, the replica that they tried to fly at Kitty Hawk this year.
Unsuccessfully.
That's crazy.
Unsuccessfully, yeah.
Well, that's the point.
I mean, yeah.
Yeah.
And I think it has a lot to do with weather conditions, pilot, you know, who the pilots were.
Some of it you think maybe it was just lucky that they had everything working right at the same time.
Yeah, but it's all part of the...
I don't know what the mystery is, but there's a better, there's a stronger word than that.
They were really, that's what I'm looking for.
They weren't formal research.
They really weren't trained in that, which is maybe one of the reasons they were successful, because they were willing to roll the dice and to experiment and to go.
There's no one's gone before.
That's okay.
Yeah, they're quite afraid.
Yeah.
I think you're right.
They thought everything through very methodically and very carefully.
They didn't just, and Tom would probably say this too, that other inventors at the time would build something and go out and try to fly it without really testing the parts to see if they were all going to work together.
And that's something the Wrights did very carefully.
They built their own wind tunnels.
They built wind balances and they ended up building their own propellers because they couldn't find one on the market that would suit what they needed.
There wasn't an engine for the airplane that suited what they needed, their requirements.
And so they designed it and worked with a local mechanic, Charlie Taylor, to build their own engine.
And so they went through the steps and the process of invention was a little different than other people at the time.
Another person that
besides Tom or besides Ken Hyde, would be Howard DuFour, who has researched the engine of the Wright Brothers.
Howard is a model maker himself.
D-U-F-O-U-R?
D-U-F-O-U-R.
And he's a local person.
I'd give you his number, too, and he would be delighted to talk with you, but would you call him and be prepared to talk a long time.
But he's a Dayton guy.
He's a Dayton guy.
He's 89 years old.
Oh, great.
And he has a couple patents to his own name.
And he researched the engine, right?
He has researched the engine to the T. Yeah, he knows.
And actually, he wrote a book about it.
He wrote a book about it, and we could give him a copy of the Charlie Taylor book, too.
But Howard is somebody who's somewhat of a self-made... Whatever you can spare.
Okay, we'll give you a real packet of things.
This is going to work.
But Howard is somebody who identifies with the Wrights and Charlie Taylor because he's kind of a self-made person.
He doesn't have much formal education either, and yet he ended up working at Monsanto on nuclear projects, on the Manhattan Project.
So he's one of these people that... This pairs up beautifully, you know.
I think that we were talking about this in Florida.
I have this scene that I've written after this.
And, of course, it's local to me in Massachusetts, but it's Goddard, you know, the past president of the Goddard Library.
Yeah, I did that.
And, you know, Lindbergh, just before he died, well, in his autobiography and values, I think, he said, you know, his great hero was Robert Goddard, Lindbergh.
He said, this is the guy that, and he went to see him before Goddard died in Worcester, which is, but Goddard, of course, is a very formally written
a formally educated guy.
Everything is documented.
When World War II ends, they asked the German scientists that we captured, Ron Brown, where did you learn how to make these rockets?
And they said, well, ask your Dr. Goddard.
He knows more about it than anything.
He read his books, you know, and we read his patents, we read his articles.
But now you can just
I contrast that so nicely with the two great flight achievements of the 20th century.
The Wright Brothers and Goddard, they both kind of come at it from different, and they're both successful.
It's kind of like Abraham Lincoln and Thomas Jefferson.
Abraham Lincoln never goes beyond the second day.
Jefferson is the first president to have a college degree, also brilliant.
I think this is really wonderful for me.
They're a fascinating pair.
Yeah.
And all this material kind of started coming over here when, or something like that, or more later than that?
We received our Wright Brothers collection in 1975.
Oh, which is fairly recent.
Yeah.
The Library of Congress was given first choice at the collection here in Dayton.
It was sitting in the basement of Ivanette's home.
for many, many years, boxes full of all these photographs and glass plates and diaries and letters.
She talks about that in here?
I think so, yeah.
So the Library of Congress came to Dayton right after Orville died in the 1948-49 period.
And they took back to D.C.
the glass plate natives, about three or four hundred glass plates.
They took their diaries and journals that documented flights.
They took a body of correspondence, the letters that they had received or written to other people of the time.
They left behind what we got.
And what we got was all of the family material, all of their father's diaries, almost 4,000 prints.
many of which from those glass plates, original prints.
I don't know, but I'm glad they did.
We got, you know, things like their report cards.
We eventually received all of the medals and awards.
Except today, it's really a material artifact.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
We have a couple propellers from the Wright Brothers hanging on our walls here.
They're Michelin trophies at the entrance to the archives here.
I don't know if you stopped to see that.
You want to take a picture.
Yeah.
Yes, absolutely.
So in the 70s, the family was looking for a local home for the rest of the collection, and Wright State was a fairly young university at the time.
We started as a branch campus of Ohio State and Miami University at Oxford in 1964.
In 67, we became an independent state university, and we were named after the Wright brothers.
So we were only, what, ten years old when the family was looking for a home.
And we said, hey, you know.
So this institution was founded when?
1967?
57 would be the first.
67, yeah.
67, we became an independent state university.
In 77, we signed the deed for the collection.
So in 30-something, 37 years or whatever, you really do have a preeminent collection.
It is.
It's very unusual for an institution of this kind.
A lot of the regionals, very young state universities, don't get into archives and special collections at all.
They've been preempted by the ... Oh, yeah, by the flagship, by the Ohio States of the world.
Exactly.
But we were very fortunate, just a concatenation of circumstances.
We end up with this collection, and of course, we're a semestral from the Wright-Patt.
We have a physical ambiance here being so close to the Wright-Patt.
I mean, you basically adjoined the year.
Yeah, exactly.
Part of the land the university's on was deeded to us by Wright-Patterson Forest Base.
And then we end up with this wonderful collection, and so it's a natural for us to get into that.
You must have been pretty busy last year.
Oh, boy, that's an understatement.
Is that right?
The collection, it attracted so much attention.
I mean, the whole world celebrated the centennial of flight.
It's not something that was a local Dayton celebration.
It's a worldwide event, and we were a source.
for everybody who was making a film, a documentary, a book, a children's, you know, educational curriculum, exhibits.
We had calls from literally all over the world from people who wanted to build an airplane, build a replica and try to fly it.
So we were very much in demand last year for information and images.
Don't mind me.
Don't mind you.
That's right.
I don't think anybody here in the archives who worked with this collection sat still last year for more than a minute.
You'll want to show Nick, too, the Brazilian newspaper.
You'll need to see that.
It's a huge possibility.
Yeah.
We were interviewed a lot during the last couple of years for information on the rights, and one of the things I was asked to talk about was the controversy between Alberto Santos Dumont, the Brazilian aviator,
and the Wright brothers, who flew first.
The Brazilians say Santos Dumont did, and are very adamant and passionate about it, passionate about it.
And of course, the U.S.
and Dayton and us, we promote Wright brothers as the first to fly.
Well, do they have any documentation?
They have some documentation, but it's— The lessons used to claim they invented baseball on the helicopter.
I think it's well documented that Wilbur and Orville were the first at having a successful powered aircraft.
I got called to do an interview for a Brazilian newspaper at Sao Paulo.
I think it's like the third largest newspaper in Brazil.
And I gave my side of the story based on what I knew.
The facts were that Santos Dumas, yeah, he was an aviation pioneer, but he wasn't first.
The Wright Brothers had done much more earlier than he did, and it's documented.
But they are very adamant that he should be given much more credit than he was given.
When I got a copy of the newspaper, I was pitted with, I don't know if you know who Paul Hoffman is?
He wrote a book on Santos Dumont recently, but he was also an editor for Science Magazine, Discovery Channel, and he's very well-known, I guess, in newspaper circles.
But here we are, and I'll show you the newspaper.
I'm on one side promoting the Wright Brothers, and he's on the other side.
It's a full-page color article, my head and his head.
And he's this famous person, and I'm the
Archivist from Dayton, Ohio.
But you're working with the stuff, though.
Yeah.
You've got the documents on your site.
I think so.
But he's promoting Santos Dumont.
Of course, it's all in Portuguese.
Did you spell this fellow's name?
Oh, Alberto Santos Dumont.
Santos, S-A-N-T-O-S.
And then Dumont, D-U-M-O-N-T.
He's...
He was a Brazilian who went to... Right.
He was flying dirigibles, airships.
Oh, okay, so you know about Dumont.
Quite a bit, yeah.
And I think the important point is how do you define controllables?
Exactly.
Right.
See, we have aviation, and this is Barbara.
Hi, Barbara.
No, this is great.
Believe me, this is all grist for the mill.
I'm sorry, if I'm saying anything wrong, please jump in.
The budget of Mars was started as a balloonist.
He was an aeronaut, and he had people flying gliders in Europe.
But the important point is the concept of control.
Control, exactly.
And so that puts them apart.
I think that's why they belong.
They're playing with a little bit different.
And powered flight, that was this guy?
Control flight.
And they could turn.
The idea of banking is what's really cool.
So the heli-lines and the... Right.
Well, heli-lines came later.
I think Curtis introduced that, but it's really a French concept.
But the idea of a wing war being able to go by or left, and no one has seen that in Europe.
The Rites got a lot of recognition when they went to Europe.
They somehow drive you to the kids down here so much.
We had the Europe every once in a while.
That's correct.
Now, are you a writer or a researcher?
I'm a historian.
I'm working on a book on women and names during the Golden Age.
And what brings you here?
Where are you from?
I'm from Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton.
I met Barbara at the E.C.
The Crony reception.
Barbara, what's your last name?
G-A-N-S-O-N.
And you're at F-A-U?
But, you know, Santos Dumont, Alberto Santos Dumont, and he was a very important pioneer.
I think we have to give him a lot of recognition.
Oh, yeah.
And that's what I said in my interview.
He is a pioneer.
He gives credit.
A lot of people did.
Yeah.
That's the key.
You couldn't sell it.
Probably a better way to sell your collection than to me.
Yes.
It doesn't do anything besides you.
Oh, yeah.
We can really get that.
It's almost like a relationship.
Absolutely.
I'm glad you typed in.
I should show you this newspaper article.
It's in Portuguese.
Oh, good.
We had it translated by somebody so that we'd know whether they said what I said correctly and what he said.
Well, that's all right.
Thank you.
Let's see.
Where are we?
We were talking about Santos Dumont.
Oh, we had so many activities last year.
We were very busy and in demand and all that.
I think that's what we were talking about.
Yeah.
Excellent.
I'm not sure what direction you'd like to take this morning.
You can look at their library and sit down with the books and just spend some time looking at those.
Stuff like that, yeah.
Okay.
And I can take you to the... You can either spend some time out here with the books...
like Chanute's book and Lilienthal's book, or we can go to the back and I can show you some more of the collection.
I would kind of like a sense of the stuff.
Okay, well, let's take a walk then, maybe.
Did they annotate the books at all?
Chanute's book and Lilianthal's book and some of the technical reports are annotated.
This list will tell you which ones are annotated.
So we could pull a specific volume.
Maybe we could choose a couple of pictures of where some of the annotations are.
That would be kind of cool.
I mean, I'm not going to have time to obviously read the books.
Right.
You might show, maybe the thing you do is to start out with more technical stuff and then move through there.
And then just be mindful of what our time is.
Basically... We're not going to have... Yeah, it's ten after ten already.
Yeah, and...
We'll have to be at 11.30.
Well, lunch is at 11.30, isn't it?
No, it's at 12.
Oh, is it 12?
Okay.
If we leave at 11.30, then we can get there.
That's about a time an hour.
Okay.
All right.
Well, let me pull a couple of these.
Should I stay here?
Yeah, just stay here, and I'll pull this in here.
Oh, okay.
You need to have your hand in there.
Oh, that's all right.
No, that's good.
I like that.
You like hands?
Yeah, I do.
I like that.
That's very good.
Can I have a nice picture?
This one is Shamit's book.
Very, look at that.
Red to death, isn't it?
Yeah.
And it has Orville's estate stamp in it.
And that is Progress?
Progress in flying machines.
The annotations in this one, again, sometimes they're just little marks like that at other places in the book.
Things might be underlined, or maybe just one little word is written along the margins.
And what's your publication on this one?
It was published in New York.
1894.
1894?
Mm-hmm.
So nine years before.
Progress in flying machines.
That is so cool.
Let's see.
Annotations.
Here we go.
Marginal alineations and notes.
There's several annotations, you know, mostly just underlining.
There's no, again, the Eureka thing, right?
No, there isn't.
You know, it's kind of frustrating in a way.
You wish he would have, you know, written all over the page.
Here it is.
But he didn't.
And this is from Orville's library, but we can assume that both brothers read this.
Yeah, these particular books, they would have had in their position when Orville and Wilbur were very young, 1890s, first thinking about airplanes, gliders, and kites.
Some of the later books I'll show you in the back of the archives are when, you know, later stuff that Orville would have accumulated.
But these two, yeah.
These are all the cited.
They're all, yeah.
I don't even have to worry about waiting on that.
Yeah, they're all right here.
Like here's a little bitty small.
Very good, yeah.
This is good.
This is helpful.
Yeah, it's great.
Yeah, it's fascinating to see that.
You'd be amazed at details, but the kind of things that I really like.
This is Lilienthal's bird flight.
And this is the— Lilienthal was a German glider pilot, an inventor, and the Wrights really respected Lilienthal for his early experiments and studied his tables
of um lift and other scientific data that he accumulated on his gliding flight and they followed his very closely until they discovered that his tables were wrong this is a case where they were willing to not accept what was the accepted you know statistics or or information at the time is this his seal or is this something that was this was put
into the books when Orville passed away to identify them as a part of his estate.
Okay.
And then the signature is that of Harold S. Miller, who was Ivanette's husband, who was one of the executors.
So this is that?
This is later.
Yeah, this was put on 1948, 49.
So they didn't have a book plate?
No, they didn't.
No, I've never seen one.
Here's a little bit more.
Who's the?
Oh, there we go.
Here's some more notes.
This one might be better yet.
Well, what is this?
Well, we think these are Orville's.
writings later on.
We're not sure.
These aren't dated, so we don't know when he did this.
So what we're looking at is, we're taking a picture of it.
These are Orville's handwritten?
Handwritten notes concerning what he's reading in Lilienthal's book, we assume.
And again, we're not sure if this is Wilbur or Orville, you know, doing notations.
We think that Wilbur probably would
would have been the first one to really peruse these books in detail.
And then Orville got interested along with them a little bit later.
But these two are probably there.
We've got X's.
We've got underlines.
Yeah.
We've got some more.
What they're really interested in.
This forces upon us the conviction.
This is page 23.
that our knowledge of the actual mechanical processes of bird flight can only be increased by a successful research into the laws of air resistance, and that such knowledge will finally yield us the means of technical success.
Bird flight is a method of flight which requires comparatively little energy, and only when we have found a true explanation of that shall we find the means for an exploitation of its advantages."
And this is something that either Wilbur or Orville has
Highlighted in some way, yeah.
Highlighted with a vertical strike of a pencil, and that seems to be really interesting to them, and I'm going to take a picture of it.
And it's sort of an abstract of the way they perceive it, too.
Say that again?
It's an abstract of their methods and their procedures.
Here's another one where... Question mark.
Oh, that's great.
Page 12.
Only that air resistance is generally known, which is produced when we move a thin plane surface in a direction at right angles to its plane.
Yeah, he's put a question mark on that.
Well, and actually, this is Lilienthal's book, and he's referring to— Oh, wow.
Page XXI.
Why don't you read this?
Okay.
I had, as similarly related of the Brothers Wright, endeavored to construct on a larger scale the small flyers moved by a rubber spring
then much patronized and known as Japanese flies.
Of course, they note that they're in reference to themselves.
And what year is this book?
1911.
Okay.
This is eight years after.
This is a reprint, I think.
Or it's a later edition of the first one.
This was originally printed in German.
Let me grab the German.
The point here is they've already been successful, right?
This is 1889.
It was Lilienthal's original work.
This has been updated with an addendum by Gustaf, which I think is his son.
Because Lilienthal was killed in 1899, I think?
1889.
So this is the original.
Do you think they read any of this in the German?
It's possible.
Their mother was of German descent, and there may have been some German spoken in the household, and they probably had a basic knowledge.
I'm not sure.
I can't say for sure if they actually read it in German or not.
Great.
Well, are there any annotations?
In the German, probably not.
I think the ones that we've done so far in the English version.
So this, what we were just reading, was a new preface, probably.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I believe so.
So, birthright is the basis of aviation.
Mm-hmm.
A contribution towards a system of aviation.
Compiled from the results of numerous experiments made by O.N.G.
Lilianthal.
Good.
Terrific.
That was a German title.
These are all from Orville?
Yeah, these books belong to Orville and Wilbur.
If you hadn't thought of repairing or anything like that, this is kind of the... At least for now.
I mean, a lot of, we don't, these are reprinted in modern versions so people can read them and handle them.
So these are more artifactual.
Yes.
Right.
And there are other books that belong to them over here.
I don't know if you're interested in looking at any more of those.
No, I think we've got some great examples here, actually.
And these are foreign language journals that they were... Yes.
French, aerofile.
I'm probably saying that wrong.
German, and we also have English.
Some works on Langley's early experiments in flight.
There's even some early books on Santos Dumont.
So they studied widely.
I mean, they read widely.
They didn't just focus in on what they were doing.
They learned from all of these other people.
Of course, the dates here in 1909, so obviously it's up to...
Yes.
They didn't just quit in 1903.
I mean, they continued to resign.
Yeah, the 03 flyer was actually not a very efficient machine.
No, it wouldn't be until 05.
Actually, the 05 flyer is really the first of all flyable plane, and they've got that, again, in one of the museums.
And what were you about to tell me over here?
Just a couple other examples of the types of things they had in their library.
This is J. Bell Pettigrew, 1874, animal locomotion.
Again, studying birds and movement of animals and birds to figure out how did they fly.
So how can we fly?
And the other two you took out of here.
Yeah, I took it out of the case, yeah.
That's great.
This is kind of the aviation parts, technical books and things.
They also collected numerous technical reports that they would get from the Smithsonian or other scientific organizations, and those are all stored in the back.
Is this stuff to it?
This is not from the Wright Brothers.
This part of the reading room, this is all aviation history.
secondary sources, but books that were published at the turn of the century all the way up to the present.
We still have subscriptions to modern aviation journals, or journals that have been published since the turn of the century that are still going.
So this is what our researchers come in and use, in addition to the manuscript collections, to study aviation history.
Terrific.
So, why don't we take that?
Okay.
Just in case you're interested, there's Orville Wright's address book here on the wall in this little case.
Right here?
Yep.
And it's really a who's who of who he knew at the time.
Not only a few theaters, but ordinary friends and family, of course.
1905 Propeller.
Oh, it's there.
Wow.
Propeller.
Was that the one that took over and studied at the Air Force?
Not this one, no.
Although Ken Hyde came, I knew the 09 was out there.
I'm interested in one of the military flyers here.
This one Ken Hyde studied, this guy's from Virginia and did later computerized measuring the .
Many awards and honors throughout their career, especially after they've traveled to Europe.
and did those public flights at Le Mans and Pau, France in 08 and 09.
And we have here in our collection medals that they were awarded.
So we have their Congressional Medals of Honor, French Legion of Honor, City of Dayton, State of Ohio.
I mean, the list goes on and on, but these are the things that they were given as awards for their accomplishments.
You call them the university's crown jewels.
Yeah, one of our archivists a while back came up with that title.
What's that illustrated book there?
We have a collection of children's literature.
Some of the books have been illustrated by Arthur Rackham.
They do some displays of different books.
So these are unrelated to the... Very unrelated to the aviation, although we do have some really good early books on juvenile literature on aviation.
that we have stored around the corner here.
There's another propeller.
This is a bent-end propeller, later model.
This was used around 1912, 1913 on a later right aircraft in the early paper tip.
Oh, handmade, to be sure.
Uh-huh.
The framed picture of the first flight there went up on the space shuttle two years ago.
That one there?
Uh-huh.
Great.
Yep.
I was really nervous when we sent it out, but it came back safely, so.
But that's one of the original prints from the collection.
Well, let's go towards the back and I'll show you some more of the actual material.
Well, I'm just reading it.
It says, the White Brothers' first flight lasted 12 seconds and covered a distance of 120 feet.
The flight of the space shuttle Atlantis lasted just under 11 days and covered a distance of about 4.5 million miles.
Isn't that great?
Kind of amazing, isn't it?
Yeah.
It's kind of cool when one of the documents I'm interested in from Goddard, I think it was like 1919, he wrote a little pamphlet on the feasibility of attaining high altitudes, you know.
And it was ignored and it was ridiculed and belittled, including the New York Times.
And 35 years ago yesterday, when...
The first moon landing was taking place, the New York Times apologized in an editorial.
We were wrong, they said.
Leave the little Dr. Goddard.
Here's a few more of the items from the collection.
You can see some of the early newspapers.
You might be interested in what the Wright Brothers printed themselves.
This is a copy of their West Side News.
Let me know if I can move it right there.
This one dates to 1889.
they first got started um in printing in the late mid-late 1880s and printed you know local neighborhood newspaper the west side years and they also printed the evening items they did a little bit of printing for our african-american author and poet here from dayton um
The wonderful thing about this particular issue is on the back, they printed a tribute to their mother who had passed away from tuberculosis.
Where's the date on it?
This one is 1889, July 3rd.
So they were printers.
They were printers before they were bicycle makers and airplane builders.
Maybe just some other newspapers from when Will passed away at typhoid in Orville Wright, 1948.
A true man, a Dayton mechanic.
He conquered the air.
Kings and people honor him.
The world mourns its loss.
That's June 1, 1912.
The flags are at half-match.
Today is a token of respect and a memory of William Wilbur Wright.
NCR Weekly is... National Pass Register Company here in Dayton.
Oh, Dayton.
Yep, there you go.
I didn't realize how big a city Dayton is.
Um, where we keep the collection.
half the free boxes in the cupboards here.
I've pulled a few of the things that you might be interested in.
These are the books that are in, they're more of general reading sorts of things from their collection, and I have a complete list of all these books that I have on the table out there for you.
Good.
Some of what's interesting about these books is after Wilbur died in 1912 and after Orville and Catherine, I mean, they've become famous, all three of them, including Catherine, because of their travels and because of their inventions.
They met so many famous people, and many authors included, and they would be given gifts of books by these authors, and they're signed.
They got to know Vilhamar Stephenson, the Arctic explorer, and he wrote several books and autographed them for Catherine or Orville.
There are books in there from, if I can remember some of the authors,
Their names escape me now, but they moved in circles where they were meeting a lot of these famous people.
Any big important one that might be interesting for me to take a photograph of an inscription to them?
I'll go grab the list.
Why don't you sit down and look at things here, and we'll look and see if you can pick one.
Okay.
Is there any evidence that they read any of these books?
Well, nothing in writing.
But I mean, there are no annotations.
Although I think there are a lot of bird books in this.
Why does that not surprise me?
They moved to Hawthorne Hill, where you'll see this afternoon.
Orville had visitors who were orthodontologists and plants and tree people.